Universe and earth

age ;Universe 13.8 Ga ( billion years )
age ;Earth 4.5 Ga

Thickness of the crust, etc, see sketch on github repository. (github.com/DowntownCookieFrenzy/University/)

Less dense material floats on more dense;
Oceanic crust for this reason floats on the mantle.

Challenger Deep == 11030
Mt Everest      == 8850


Percentages of elements in different parts.

Decompression Melting:
Temperature and pressure responsible for melting.
High P + High T = solid
Decompression melting is when the pressure drops and magma gets to melt again.


Fluid Induced Melting:
Happens at subduction zones. Continental + Oceanic regions;

Plate tetonics; This is on github.
Divirgent ; Two plates pulling apart ; Magma gets pulled out - decompression melting && pressure.
-> Honestly read up on this; Seems like there is more to it than what I have on git.
-> What is associated with ocean spreading centers? Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
-> Seems like lots of notes on particular rift zones

Volcanic Island Arch - Refer to ocean-ocean plates.

Transform Boundaries -> Where occurs? San Andreas Fault ; What is associated with it. Earthquakes and big earthquakes.

Quickly lookup Mantle plumes; an upwelling of abnormal hot rock within the Earth's mantle.

** As the heads of mantle plumes can partly menlt when they reach shallow depths, they are thought to be the cause of volcanic centers known as hotspots.

History of plate movement; How magmatic rocks record the magnatism of the Earth at a particular time.


Minerals:
    * A mineral is a naturually occuring solid crystalline substance usually inorganic... etc ( lookup ).

Name The Eight Types Of Mineral And An Example?
Type of silicates ; Single + double chains etc

Rock cycle! :3

Know all igneous rocks textures ( names + meaning )
Know mineral + chemical composition.


Intrusive - inside the crust;
Extrusive - outside the crust; Cool quickly so they have a lack of crystal graph

Define pyroclasts.

Know Bowen's Reaction Series. ********* NB xD

Viscosity is pretty important; Silicone content is important - more bondings.

** Lava Flows; Certain area in x has pyrolitic lavas; What lava types would form?

Forms of igneous rocks; Plutons and etc.


**  Know the ring of fire.

Viscosity depends on 
    Temperature
    Chemical Composition
    Volatile content of magmas
    
Speed of different types of lava.


** Two types of eruptions : Explosive ; Effusive - more viscous ; Think of the area an effusive eruptions covers.



Types of volcanic eruptions:
    Hawaiian - information
    Strombolian - information
    Plinian - information
    
Three lava flows:
    -> aa ( not a typo ) - High viscosity.
    -> pahoehoe - Basaltic
    -> pillow lava - only forms at mid oceanic ridges.
    
Define the three types of lava flows shortly.





Exercises:

True or false:
    Magma cools, plagioclase feldspar becomes calsium-rich: False
    Minerals in felsic rocks form at lower temperature than minerals in mafic rocks: True ( From bowen's reaction series )

Which mineral would you not see in a felsic rock:
    Muscovite 
    Quartz
    Olivine ( x is the answer )
    Amphibole
    
Lookup images for dikes and syls.
Dikes: Accross a cut accross existing rock layers.
Syl:   Lies in between a rock layers(?)


** Know opholite sequences.
Opholite forms at subduction zones;

As oceanic crust subducts a piece gets broken off and lodges against the continental crust which makes it easy to after a variable amount of time inspect these rocks. Know the types of sequences.


Define felsic volcanism

Which of the plate tectonic environments is most associated with felsic volcanism: Continental Volcanic Arch

Composition of igneous rock which comprimises oceanic crust: Mafic

Trigger of mantle melting that occurs beneath mid-ocean ridges: Radiation

In what tectonic environment will water most likely influence rock melting: subduction zones.

Due to this process a magma chamber can generate intermediate composition volcanism witih an oceanic plate: All of these.

Which location has water saturated sediments being transported down to the upper mantel: Along the andead trench.


Which of the locations is least associated with a volcanically active plate boundary? 

Strubenkop question ; Know how to draw it.
    - Quartz (?) 
    - Sandstone ; Sandstone ; bigger
    - Salt ; slightly bigger
    - Bottom is shale; Fine grained.
    
A few million years ago strubenkop was an inland sea ; Fine sized particles will be deposited in a low energy environment.
Water level regresses a few times and the level drops; Different minerals will be deposited. Regression.

Exercise notes are on clickup.

Might get a question on Well-Sorted and poorly sorted rocks.

** Make sure to know majurity of a particle.

Ripple marks on strubenkop are an indication that it was once a marina.

Know laminar and turbulent flow.

What state is the earths mantle: Solid

Quartz has a cleavage? fuckno!

Decompression triggers plume melting? True

Continental crust magma is more felsic.

Aphantic textures refers to a texture involving: crystals visible with a microscipe

Inner core is made of iron; Solid or liquid?

Silica envolope of the earth: 0 - 5 km

Outer core is in a liquid state because it takes on less pressure than the inner core.

A melanocratic plutonic rock with 50wt % SiOw high content of FeO, MgO is probably Basalt.
    Compare granite and basalt. 
    ( There are loads of questions on these make sure to be able to answer all of them
       has a shitton to do with the composition of these rock types ; the silica vs Fe content etc. )
       
The earth and other planets were accreted from the protoplanetary disk.

The earth were accreted from gravitational forces.

A quartz arentite ( lookup , too slow ! )

A conglomerate is a lithified gravel with clasts.

Oceanic crust is subducted into the mantle because of compression and high density.

Mohorovicic Discontinuity is the boundary between continental and oceanic crust.


Which 6 elements are important in the formation of the Earth's mantle (6)


Which of the locations listed below is least associated with a volcanically active plate boundary? ( whoops ) 




Other Notes:
    Have a look at mark allocation.
